+++
title = "Spintronics and the limitations of every day electronics"
date = "2022-12-23"
author = "Robert"
description = "In today's society electronic devices are heavily incorporated in everyone's daily life. The everlasting desire to make our computers run faster, necessarily leads to smaller and smaller electric components. Where in the early 70s a single computer chip could host up to a few thousands of transistors, today the number approaches tens to hundreds of billions and soon will reach a fundamental limit."
mathjax = true
bibFile = "data/biblio2.json"
+++

# Spintronics and the limitations of every day electronics
In today's society electronic devices are heavily incorporated in everyone's daily life. The everlasting desire to make our computers run faster, necessarily leads to smaller and smaller electric components. Where in the early 70s a single computer chip could host up to a few thousands of transistors, today the number approaches tens to hundreds of billions and soon will reach a fundamental limit {{< cite "mccleanreport" >}}. 

At the heart of electronic devices are electronic circuits that control the charge of electrons. Besides charge, electrons however possess two spin states that can be named "up" and "down", a degree of freedom that can be utilized in both data storage and processing. The giant magneto-resistance effect {{< cite "binasch_enhanced_1989;baibich_giant_1988">}} for example has made a tremendous impact on data storage technologies {{< cite "puebla_spintronic_2020">}}. 

Unfortunately these improvements in computer chips and data storage has led to an increase in energy consumption. Predictions say the total electricity demand of information and communication technology will be 20.9\% of the total world's electricity demand {{< cite "jones_how_2018" >}} by 2030. 

Spin-based electronics or "spintronics" as it is often referred to, has become an active field of research. Compared with charge-based devices, spin-based devices could in principle have higher density, lower energy cost, and faster operating speed {{< cite "pu_chapter_2020;liu_chapter_2020;book_recent_advancements" >}}. Despite active research, many open questions remain about the electron spin dynamics. These include among others understanding the effects of spin-orbit coupling, spin-valley coupling, and spin-photon interaction {{< cite "liu_chapter_2020;hellman_interface-induced_2017">}}. 

## Spintronics in ferro- and antiferromagnets
Ferromagnetic spintronics has greatly contributed to microelectronic technology in the last few decades {{< cite "bader_spintronics_2010;sinova_new_2012;bhatti_spintronics_2017">}}. One of the practical results was the development of magnetic memories with purely electronic write-in and read-out processes as an alternative to existing solid state drive technologies {{< cite "kent_new_2015;sato_two-terminal_2018" >}}.

Ferromagnetic thin films have already entered commercial use in hard drives, magnetic field and rotation angle sensors and in similar devices {{< cite "Parkin2003;Jogschies2015;Novoselov2019">}}, while keeping high promises for technologically competitive ultrafast memory elements {{< cite "Lau2016">}} and neuromorphic chips {{< cite "Fukami2016">}}. 

It is widely known that spin-orbit interaction provides an efficient way to couple electronic and magnetic degrees of freedom. It is, therefore, no wonder that the largest torque on magnetization, which is also referred to as the spin-orbit torque, emerges in magnetic systems with strong spin-orbit interaction {{< cite "miron_current-driven_2010;haney_current_2013">}} as has been long anticipated {{< cite "dyakonov_current-induced_1971">}}. 

The spin-orbit coupling may be enhanced by confinement potentials in effectively two-dimensional systems consisting of conducting and magnetic layers. The in-plane current may efficiently drive domain walls or switch magnetic orientation in such structures with the help of spin-orbit torque {{< cite "awschalom2009trend;manchon_theory_2008;garate_influence_2009;manchon2009theory">}}, which is present even for uniform magnetization, or with the help of spin-transfer torque, which requires the presence of magnetization gradient (due to e.g. domain wall) {{< cite "slonczewski_current-driven_1996;berger_emission_1996;ralph_spin_2008;stiles_anatomy_2002">}}. 

On the other hand, antiferromagnets have received a great deal of attention due to their high temperature magnetic order in a large variety of materials. The study of antiferromagnets have uncovered many interesting properties. For example, the antiferromagnet has zero magnetic moment, is
insensitive to external fields and contains no internal stray fields.
Furthermore, ultrafast switching of the antiferromagnetic order has been observed {{< cite "gomonay_high_2016;olejnik_terahertz_2018;jungwirth_multiple_2018;macdonald_antiferromagnetic_2011;gomonay_spintronics_2014;zelezny_relativistic_2014">}}. In
spintronic devices these properties translate to storing magnetic data at high densities, fast
reading and writing, and, in addition to low energy consumption, make the antiferromagnet an ideal candidate for further study.

An increasing demand for ever higher performance computation and ever faster big data analytics has therefore sparked the interest to antiferromagnetic spintronics {{< cite "macdonald_antiferromagnetic_2011;gomonay_spintronics_2014;wadley_electrical_2016;jungwirth_antiferromagnetic_2016;baltz_antiferromagnetic_2018;jungwirth_multiple_2018;jungfleisch_perspectives_2018">}}, i.e. to the usage of the much more subtle antiferromagnetic order parameter to store and process information. This idea is driven primarily by the expectation that antiferromagnetic materials may naturally allow for up to THz operation frequencies {{< cite "gomonay_high_2016;olejnik_terahertz_2018;jungwirth_multiple_2018;macdonald_antiferromagnetic_2011;gomonay_spintronics_2014;zelezny_relativistic_2014">}} in sharp contrast to ferromagnets whose current-induced magnetization dynamics is fundamentally limited to GHz frequency range. 
  
Recently, spin-orbit-torque-driven electric switching of the Néel vector orientation has been predicted {{< cite "zelezny_relativistic_2014">}} and discovered in non-centrosymmetric crystals such as CuMnAs {{< cite "wadley_electrical_2016;fina_electric_2017;zelezny_spin_2018;saidl_optical_2017">}} and Mn$_2$Au {{< cite "barthem_revealing_2013;jourdan_epitaxial_2015;bhattacharjee_neel_2018">}}. Even though many antiferromagnetic compounds are electric insulators {{< cite "pandey_doping_2017">}}, which limits the range of their potential applications, e.g., for spin injection {{< cite "tshitoyan_electrical_2015">}}, the materials like CuMnAs and Mn$_2$Au possess  semi-metal and metal properties, inheriting strong spin-orbit coupling and sufficiently high conductivity. These materials also give rise to collective mode excitations in THz range {{< cite "bhattacharjee_neel_2018">}}. 

Despite a lack of clarity concerning the microscopic mechanisms of the Néel vector switching, these experiments have been widely regarded as a breakthrough in the emerging field of THz spintronics {{< cite "bhattacharjee_neel_2018;gomonay_high_2016;olejnik_terahertz_2018;jungwirth_multiple_2018;wadley_electrical_2016;jungwirth_antiferromagnetic_2016;baltz_antiferromagnetic_2018;jungfleisch_perspectives_2018">}}. It has been suggested that current-induced Néel vector dynamics in an AFM is driven primarily by the so-called Néel spin-orbit torques {{< cite "brataas_current-induced_2012;Hals2013;zelezny_relativistic_2014;freimuth_spin-orbit_2014;ghosh_spin-orbit_2017;smejkal_electric_2017;zelezny_spin_2018;zhou_strong_2018;manchon_current-induced_2019;moriyama_spin-orbit-torque_2018;li_manipulation_2019;chen_electric_2019;zhou_fieldlike_2019;zhou_large_2019;bodnar_writing_2018">}}. The Néel spin-orbit torque originates in a non-equilibrium staggered polarization of conduction electrons on AFM sublattices {{< cite "zelezny_relativistic_2014;smejkal_electric_2017;zelezny_spin_2018;manchon_current-induced_2019">}}. Characteristic magnitude of the non-equilibrium staggered polarization and its relevance for the experiments with CuMnAs and Mn$_2$Au remain, however, debated. 

# Bibliography
{{< bibliography cited >}}