+++
title = "[7/10] Pete Wu's De bananengeneratie"
score = "7/10"
cover_image = "bananen.jpg"
date = "2023-03-18"
author = "Robert"
description = "Pete Wu's book 'De Bananengeneratie' takes readers on a journey through his personal experiences growing up as a Chinese-Dutch in the Netherlands. Pete was born and raised in the Netherlands, but his Chinese heritage often made him feel like an outsider. He struggled to find his identity as someone who was 'Chinese on the outside, white on the inside', which he termed as being a 'banana'."
+++

Pete Wu's book "De Bananengeneratie" takes readers on a journey through his
personal experiences growing up as a Chinese-Dutch in the Netherlands. Pete was
born and raised in the Netherlands, but his Chinese heritage often made him feel
like an outsider. He struggled to find his identity as someone who was "Chinese
on the outside, white on the inside", i.e. like a "banana".

Growing up, Pete felt resentment towards his Chineseness, and he struggled to
reconcile his dual identity. Through his book, Pete seeks to answer the question
of what it means to grow up as a Chinese-Dutch. He shares the details of his
childhood and interviews many others who grew up with Chinese parents.

One aspect that Pete discusses in his book is the emotional distance he felt
from his parents. The lack of a "talking" culture in China, combined with his
parents' long working hours and the language barrier, made it difficult for him
to connect with them. He felt like he couldn't fully express himself, and this
led to a sense of distance in their relationship. This is a common experience
for many children of immigrant parents, as cultural differences and language
barriers can create challenges in communication and understanding.

One of the stories Pete shares in his book is about his father. He recalls his
dad telling him, "I never say that I'm proud of you because I'm afraid that by
doing so you will work less hard." This statement highlights the cultural
differences between Chinese and Dutch parenting, where the former tends to be
more reserved in expressing emotions and praise.

Pete also discusses the cultural differences he experienced. In Chinese culture,
you don't open up in general, which made it challenging for him to express his
feelings. Furthermore, he was constantly reminded that he was not considered
Dutch enough. People would often ask him where he learned Dutch or if he knew
kung fu, which were micro-aggressions that made him feel excluded.

Another thing that struck Pete while writing the book was realizing how much his
parents had given up by coming to the Netherlands. They left behind their home
and family in China to give their children a better life. This realization made
him appreciate his heritage and identity more.

Throughout the book, Pete also discusses the representation of Chinese people on
Dutch TV, which was often limited to stereotypical roles. He hopes that his book
will help break down these stereotypes and encourage people to embrace their
differences.

It's quite an interesting read. As the son of Polish parents, I noticed some
familiarities with Pete's story, but my experience was completely different. My
friends would sometimes joke about being Polish, but growing up I never felt
treated differently (looking and sounding Dutch helps of course). 

People often ask me if I feel more Polish or more Dutch, to which I usually
answer that I feel neither. I wonder how Pete would feel if he grew up in an
environment where looking Asian doesn't receive special treatment. Growing up as
a kid, it is important to belong to and feel accepted by your group. This I
imagine is one of the root causes of his desire to be more Dutch and less
Chinese. And now that he reconciled with his past, it seemed that he accepted
being Chinese on the outside and Dutch on the inside, just like a banana. But
does this mean he feels being Dutch, Chinese or both, Chinese-Dutch? 