+++
title = "[8/10] Steve Magness' Do Hard Things"
date = "2023-07-10"
author = "Robert"
description = ""
draft = true
+++

Summary: "Do Hard Things" explores the misconceptions surrounding toughness.
Using anecdotes from his experience in running together with the latest
scientific results, Steve Magness teaches us how to "cultivate real toughness".
Right away Steve dismisses the conventional wisdom that harsh coaching and tough
parenting characterized by verbal and physical abuse, produces real toughness.
More often than not, such approaches act as filters rather than effective
training methods. 

The book explores many psychological factors that play a role in athletic
performance. Self-esteem for example is not driven by rewards and punishment but
is derived from personal growth. The *fake it till you make it* mentality is
also something that is proven to not work. It works in the short term in
low-challenge situations but is completely ineffective in more demanding
situations {{< cite "fakeit" >}}. Similarly, overconfidence is also shown to be detrimental. 
True self-esteem and true confidence are the product of
self-awareness: being true to yourself and the ability to choose appropriate
goals to maintain motivation and overcome obstacles. Confidence and esteem,
then, come from effectively utilizing one's capabilities, rather than relying on
superficial beliefs.

Emotions and feelings are discussed as valuable indicators of one's health and
state of mind. The book explains how naming and understanding these emotions can
provide a sense of control and aid in problem-solving. It highlights the
benefits of utilizing anxiety and pressure as motivators, rather than allowing
them to hinder progress.

Furthermore, it explores how developing equanimity, the ability to respond
rather than react, is crucial in developing toughness. Similar to mindfulness,
stoicism, and yoga, equanimity is not about suppression of feelings or
indifference, but rather about a balanced approach to experience, meaning that
one does not fall into emotional extremes because of worldly winds such as
praise and blame, success and failure, pleasure and pain. 

This is somewhat in contrast to cognitive narrowing, where one's focus and
attention become too concentrated at the expense of other stimuli in the
environment. Not only does this have negative effects on rumination, and
decision-making, but it can also lead to depression. 

In essence, we are encouraged to embrace challenges, seek personal growth, and
develop resilience through self-awareness, autonomy, and a sense of purpose. By
adopting these principles, individuals can navigate difficulties and develop
"real toughness".

thoughts: The book contains a nice balance between light-weight anecdotes and
the more heavy descriptions of psychological experiments and scientific facts.
The content seems well-researched and established and it seems that Steve knows
what he talks about. The book was not quite what I expected it to be. I expected
more about physical training, diets and overall the effect on the body and mind
of *doing hard things*. As mentioned in the summary, the book leans heavily on
mental health. It is somewhat surprising that a healthy and strong mind is a
necessity for top-performing athletes, though it does remind me of e.g. what Andre
Agassi wrote in his biography *Open*: that he lost important matches because
his head wasn't in the right place.

Steve proposes several "pillars" that need to be built to cultivate toughness.
Most of these pillars are mantras, or advice to achieve a sort of mental
calmness. These pillars can be found in many self-help books, so most of it was
new to me, but it was a nice refresher in the new context of high-performance
athletics. The last pillar, for example, to find meaning in discomfort comes from
Viktor Frankl's book Man's Search for Meaning. 


- "give up itis", the phenomenon often described as a sensation of listlessness, extreme apathy and hopelessness where an individual loses the will to live and dies, even if there is nothing physically wrong with them. 

@article{leach2018give,
  title={‘Give-up-itis’ revisited: Neuropathology of extremis},
  author={Leach, John},
  journal={Medical Hypotheses},
  volume={120},
  pages={14--21},
  year={2018},
  publisher={Elsevier}
}

@misc{fakeit,
  title={The Validity Of The “Fake-It-Till-You-Make-It” Philosophy},
  author={Jerabek, Ilona},
  url={
https://www.prweb.com/releases/the_validity_of_the_fake_it_till_you_make_it_philosophy/prweb16239903.htm}
}

The self-esteem movement in the US, e.g. getting trophies and awards for
everything, was cooked up by the politician John Vasconcellos. He envisioned
that a lack of self-esteem is the biggest contributor to many pressing problems
in the USA: drugs, crime, depression, poverty and family problems. He argued
that if every US citizen would feel worthy and valuable then they could all
reach their full potential and all problems with drugs, alcohol and criminal
behavior would naturally disappear. He assigned a sociologist, Neil Smelser, to
head a task force tasked with investigating the impact of self-esteem. After a
preliminary report by Smelser, Vasconcellos was convinced: “Self-esteem is the
likeliest candidate for a social vaccine, something that empowers us to live
responsibly and that inoculates us against the lures of crime, violence,
substance abuse, teen pregnancy, child abuse, chronic welfare dependency, and
educational failure.”. Unfortunately, Vasconcellos was all wrong and he based
this conclusion not on the actual outcomes of Smelser's main conclusions but on
a small unrelated segment of his research. Nonetheless, Vasconcellos
managed to convince politicians, the media and the public that raising
self-esteem was an absolute must. Soon after, school programs and promotional
campaigns were set up 

@article{mecca1990california,
  title={California Task Force to Promote Self-Esteem and Personal and Social Responsibility},
  author={Mecca, A and Vasconcellos, J},
  journal={Sacramento, CA: California State Dept, of Education},
  year={1990}
}

His logic was straightforward: if we could make every
person feel like they have worth and value, then each and every one could reach
their full potential. If people didn’t feel worthy, then it’s no wonder they
turned to drugs, alcohol, or criminal behavior.

Vasconcellos
Smelser

There was one little problem. The conclusions were a lie, based on opinion, not what the research actually found.

tough coaching/parenting style:
Baumrind defined responsiveness as: D. Baumrind, “The Influence of Parenting Style on Adolescent Competence and Substance Use,” Journal of Early Adolescence 11, no. 1 (1991): 56–95.

In one study of over one thousand parents: “The Fallacy of Tough Love: Queendom.com’s Study Reveals That Authoritarian Parenting Can Do More Harm Than Good,” PRWeb, August 6, 2013, https://www.prweb.com/releases/2013/8/prweb10996955.htm.

Authoritarian parenting leads to: N. Darling and L. Steinberg, “Parenting Style as Context: An Integrative Model,” Psychological Bulletin 113, no. 3 (1993): 487–96; L. R. Williams, K. A. Degnan, K. E. Perez-Edgar, H. A. Henderson, et al., “Impact of Behavioral Inhibition and Parenting Style on Internalizing and Externalizing Problems from Early Childhood through Adolescence,” Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology (June 2009): 1063–75; and C. Jackson, L. Henriksen, and V. A. Foshee, “The Authoritative Parenting Index: Predicting Health Risk Behaviors among Children and Adolescents,” Health Education & Behavior 25, no. 3 (1998): 319–37.

In one study of over 1,200 parents, authoritarian parenting: “The Fallacy of Tough Love,” PRWeb.


<!-- self-esteem and the true sources of lasting self-worth. The book emphasizes the
importance of overcoming challenges and making meaningful connections with
others as the key to developing higher self-esteem. It delves into the
detrimental effects of external regulation, where rewards and punishments drive
motivation, and highlights the significance of intrinsic motivation derived from
personal growth. -->

<!-- The author introduces the concept of an "action crisis" that individuals face
when confronted with the reality of potential failure. They explain how this
shift from a goal-directed orientation to negative thoughts and sensations can
hinder progress. The book emphasizes the value of self-awareness and the ability
to choose appropriate goals to maintain motivation and overcome obstacles.

The author explores the role of false confidence, explaining that it can be
beneficial in low-challenge situations, but ineffective in demanding
circumstances. They emphasize that true confidence comes from acknowledging and
utilizing one's capabilities effectively, rather than relying on superficial
beliefs. -->

The book explores the psychological concept of learned helplessness and its
impact on coping with stress. It emphasizes the importance of control and choice
in developing resilience and toughness. By empowering individuals to make
decisions and providing them with autonomy, the book argues that they can
develop sustainable habits and resilience.

<!-- Emotions and feelings are discussed as valuable indicators of one's health and
state of mind. The book explains how naming and understanding these emotions can
provide a sense of control and aid in problem-solving. It highlights the
benefits of utilizing anxiety and pressure as motivators, rather than allowing
them to hinder progress. -->

The book emphasizes the significance of cultivating a positive internal voice
and having a merciful, fair, and accurate inner judge. It explores how
developing equanimity, the ability to respond rather than react, is crucial in
developing toughness. The author provides insights into cognitive narrowing and
its effects on rumination, depression, and decision-making. They stress the
importance of responding instead of reacting, and the benefits of broadening
one's perspective.

The book explores the relationship between motivation, job satisfaction, and
salary, demonstrating that employee engagement is not solely dependent on
financial compensation. It delves into the factors that contribute to toughness
and performance in athletes, including autonomy support and a supportive
environment. The author emphasizes the importance of progress, competence, and
growth in maintaining motivation.

Drawing on the concept of post-traumatic growth, the book highlights the
significance of purpose in overcoming challenges and finding meaning. It
explores how individuals can navigate discomfort and integrate their experiences
into their personal narratives.

In "Do hard things" readers are encouraged to embrace challenges, seek
personal growth, and develop resilience through self-awareness, autonomy, and a
sense of purpose. By adopting these principles, individuals can navigate
difficulties and find meaning in their lives.

but where we went wrong in thinking that self-esteem in and of itself should be
the goal

successful people tend to have higher self-esteem not because they are striving
for self-worth itself, but because it is a by-product of overcoming challenges
and making meaningful connections with others

lasting self-esteem doesn't come from being told that we are great. it comes
from doing the actual work and making real connections.

those who scored high in a practical type of external motivation called external
regulation had lower improvement rates. external regulation is defined as when
"the sport is performed not for fun but to obtain rewards (e.g. praise) or to
avoid negative consequences (e.g. criticisms from parents)"

it's easy to feel confident in the beginning but when we come face-to-face with
the reality that we might fall short of our goal we experience what
psychologists call an action crisis. we shift from a goal-directed orientation
where the motivation to achieve is the focus to a state where negative thoughts
and sensations persist

if an overconfident student chooses a book that is too hard -- such as the lord
of the Rings rather than harry potter and the Sorcerers stone he or she might
stop reading after a few pages and let it sit on a bookshelf. in contrast, a
more self-aware student is more likely to finish an easier book and continue
reading more books. 

false confidence helps in situations where we largely don't need an extra boost.
Faking it works on easy tasks where the challenge is low and a bit of extra
motivation is needed to get you started.

in situations that demand toughness false confidence largely fails

confidence simply means having security in knowing that you can accomplish
whatever is within your capabilities

learned-helpnessness. the dogs had learned that pain and suffering were outside
of their control

our levels of control changes how we respond to stress. when we have a sense of
control, our alarm is quieter and easier to shut off.

if the only reason that you persist is to avoid being yelled at, performing a
physical punishment or getting tried then the message that is ingrained is to be
motivated only when someone is in your face yelling or punishment is on the line

when we don't have control, we lose the capacity to cope. It's when we have a
choice that toughness is trained

but what research shows is having a choice, such as "I'm allowed to miss two
days per week if I have to" sits in a longer lasting more sustainable habit.

It's why research shows in dieting that cheat days help. all or nothing often
leaves you with nothing

if we want to develop tough individuals we've got to put them in a position to
make decisions and empower them to do just that

emotions and feelings "provide us with a moment-to-moment perspective on the
state of our health... when we experience a condition that is conducive in the
continuation of life we describe it in positive terms and call it pleasant

the function of feelings isn't merely about updating our condition, but doing
just what Wundt hypothesized: to drive and direct us toward a possible solution

when we name something, we take back control -- converting the ambiguous to
something tangible that we can understand manipulate and come to terms with

to understand that some feelings are meaningless unimportant false alarms
triggered by an overactive inner self

researchers out of Spain found that people could use the anxiety that came along
with pressure to their advantage they could persist longer on a task reaches a
higher level of achievement on an academic test and even have greater job
satisfaction

it is easy to come up with hard and fast rules on what we should or shouldn't
say to ourselves but just like with emotions there aren't good or bad inner
voices, just ones we need or don't need to hear that moment

a good internal voice is rather like (and just as important as) a genuinely
decent judge: someone who separates good from bad but who will always be
merciful fair accurate in understanding what's going on and interested in
helping us deal with our problems.

a general lethargy lack of motivation and feeling of malaise are hallmark
symptoms. burnout alters how we handle challenges

respond to reality. for most of us, we are not only responding to the actual
stress but the reverberations of it. touch individuals learn to match perception
with reality so that they marshal the appropriate response instead of an
exaggerated one,

distraction takes little effort, so it's easy to rely on it as a strategy. it's
why most of us grab our smartphone at the first moment of being alone to develop
the ability to respond instead of react

your goal is to create space between feeling the sensations and jumping toward
the urge to quit

creating space, being tough and responding instead of reacting are all forms of
equanimity. the concept of equanimity often gets confused with not experiencing
or even suppressing emotions.

but as we learned even the deepest of meditators experience love and feat to the
same degree. they just respond to it in a different way. It's the ability to
keep your mind steady so that you can choose how to respond. whether we call it
equanimity, a calm conversation, patience or responding instead of reacting,
cultivating the space to choose the way forward is key to developing toughness.

contrary to their hypothesis, the elite runners didn't zone out. they did the
opposite: they homed in, using an associate strategy. they concluded that
runners paid very close attention to bodily input such as feelings and
desertions arising in their feet calves and thighs, as well as their
respiration... [ace was largely governed by reading their bodies.

out eyes stop dancing from side to side and become stuck staring at a few small
points in front of us

scientists call it cognitive narrowing

a narrow focus doesn't just leave our imagination empty; it plays a large role
in rumination and depression. think back to chapter 7 where we discussed how our
inner dialogue could spiral out of control toward a freakout moment. our
thoughts shift toward the negative and all of the feedback we receive seems to
validate our experience. before we know it we've quit whatever task we were
performing. negative emotions constrain our thoughts and behavior. our options
become limited when we're swamped by anger.

move toward the broad side and we shift toward relying on sensory information
for perception, having global attention bored thinking exploratory behavior and
a positive mood. move toward a narrow state of mind and our focus shifts to the
trees instead of the forest: our thinking becomes constrained, we tend to fall
back on familiar choices and actions and our mood sours

when emotional intensity gets too high we default toward the easiest path:
distraction. it's a low-cost solution that allows us to manage something in the
short term.

two-year-olds are capable of turning their attention to another object or a
person to deal with emotional discomfort

our ability to be tough is dependent on the emotions and thoughts that push or
pull us toward a decision or behavior. coping strategies act to amplify or blunt
the effects of those thoughts, feelings and emotions.

equanimity is about creating the space to be able to respond. and sometimes that
means choosing to flip the switch.

in a meta-analysis covering over 120 years of study, there was less than a 2
percent overlap between salary and job satisfaction. and a follow-up study of
over 1.4 million employees found no relationship between employee engagement and
level of pay

so all the climbers who made it to the so-called death zone of over 80000 meters
altitude only 10 percent died while making their way up the mountain, while 73
percent perished on their way back down. 

not surprisingly researchers found that the ability to reengage is linked not to
control-based motivation but instead to a drive from within. psychologists found
that when motivation comes from the inside, individuals are most likely to
adjust their actions to feedback that tells them that a goal is no attainable

we all have three basic and innate psychological needs

when we have autonomy and support we have higher self esteem and better
emotional intelligence

if the atmosphere was supportive and fostered autonomy and a sense of belonging
then the athletes were tougher and performed better

as Mahoney concluded, toughness resulted from coaching behaviours that promote
psychological needs satisfaction

when athletes perceive their coaches to be more autonomy supportive, they report
greater satisfaction of their basic psychological needs and consequently strive
for their goals with higher autonomous motives

ensuring that we can see progress is essential for maintaining motivation

cultivating an environment that allows for progress and competence has the
following characteristics: a challenging but supportive environment, the ability
to take risks and voice your opinion without feat or being the dominant
motivator, a path that shows the way for growth and improvement in your job or
field.

Maslow's work set the stage for psychology to transition from looking at what is
wrong with people to looking at what helps them grow and develop

one can choose to go back toward safety or forward toward growth. growth must be
chosen again and again; fear must be overcome again and again

when the going gets tough it's easy to lose meaning. when our job seems
overwhelming when we're on the brink of burnout it's only natural to shrug our
shoulders and ask what's the point

purpose is the glue that holds us together, allowing us to rise above even the
most harrowing of situations

individuals who experience post-traumatic growth don't avoid the discomfort.
they experience the same flood of emotions and rumination of their internal
voices that everyone else experiences. they can sort through and explore
discomfort. instead of intrusive rumination that causes them to spiral they
alter their inner voice using what psychologists call deliberate and
constructive rumination.

when we explore instead of avoid, we can integrate the experience into our story




